Now there is one last important array method which you absolutely have to know
and that's the reduce method.
Now I'm diving into it last because it's one of the more complex or challenging functions
but in the end, it's also pretty straightforward and I will explain it step-by-step.
So let's assume here with your prices, let's say the unfiltered, unchanged prices, you want to sum them
up.
Now of course what you can do is you can create for loop or you can use ForEach and you could create
a sum here,
let sum, set it to equal
and then you could go through your prices, let's say with ForEach where you have the value of each price
and then here in the end you say sum plus equal price, right?
And if you do that and you console log the sum thereafter, we should have
the sum of all prices.
So that's not too much code
and if I reload this, this probably is to sum. Again let's ignore this strange output here,
I'll explain it later, it's not a bug or an issue, just related to how computers work with floating point
numbers.
So I added these values together and I got a sum.
Now of course that's not too difficult or not too problematic here, it's a quite short code snippet but
we can actually write this with less code.
Let me comment this out and instead, create a constant sum and set this equal to prices.reduce. Now the
reduce method is another built-in method available on arrays and the reduce method takes a function.
This function as you can see takes a couple of arguments, it takes a so-called previous value, okay, it takes
a current value, okay, it takes a current index if you want to and it also accepts this original array on
which you are running it. Now I will say that current index and that array again are the arguments you don't
use that often here, the index maybe sometimes, this original array pretty much never.
I'm just adding all arguments here for completeness sake,
the first two arguments are the really important ones here though.
Now the reduce method itself also takes another optional argument or parameter.
So the first argument or parameter is this function and you must never forget, we're always passing functions
here as arguments, as parameters to sort
and so on.
So here I'm passing a function to reduce and then reduce itself does not just take this function as
its first parameter but another optional second parameter.
Now what does reduce do to begin with?
Reduce, as the name suggests, reduces an array to a simpler value,
for example it can reduce an array of numbers to the sum of these numbers.
Of course that's not the only kind of reduction it can do,
you can reduce any array to any value you need,
so the idea always is that you reduce an array to a simpler value.
Typically an array to a single number or a single string or whatever it is.
Now the second argument you pass to reduce is the initial value with which you want to start,
so here if we want to get the sum, we would start with zero probably here.
Now what happens is reduce executes this function on every element in the array, just like map and find
did and previous value for the first execution is this initial value which you set here
if it's set, otherwise it will be undefined. Current value is the first element of the array,
so generally the element of the array it's currently executing on.
So for the first execution, current value is the value of the first element in the array,
previous value is this initial value. Now here in this function,
you have to return your updated value,
so your currently reduced value,
so that in this case here would be previous value plus current value.
So for the first execution, previous value is zero, current value is
the first element in prices, so current value would be 10.99.
So now for the second execution, this function here is executed on the second element in the array which
in this case is 5.99.
Now on that second execution, previous value no longer refers to that initial value but instead, to the
value you returned in the previous execution,
so in this case since we're on the second execution, previous value will hold the value of the first
execution,
so the result here of that first execution.
Now remember in the first execution, we had 0 + 10.99 and the end here because 10.99
is the first value,
so in the second execution we'll get this 0 + 10.99,
so 10.99 in total value as a previous value
and now, this 10.99 value is what we use in this calculation here to add our current value which
for this second iteration is the second elements value, 5.99,
so now we add 10.99 + 5.99 and so on for all elements in the array. Here's
a graphical representation of what happens, let's say we have an array with the value is 1, 2 and 3 and
we want to reduce it. We might start within initial value of 0,
of course you can start with any initial value but let's say we start with zero and now the reducer
function executes.
Now this means it has a look at the first element
so to say and it returns this initial value plus that first value which is 1.
Now does this fed in into the second execution where we have a look at the second element,
so the reducer function returns three, 1 which was the result of the first execution plus 2 which is
that second element we're looking at
and then we repeat that one last time, where we have a look at the last element of that array and hence
we get six because we had three as a result of the last execution,
three also is our last element in the array, so we have 3 + 3 equals 6.
Now of course the original array is not emptied or anything like that,
I'm just removing the numbers we worked with here to make this slide clearer.
The original array is not edited in any way,
instead this only executes this logic on all array elements to gradually build up a value which you in
the end return. Well and for the last execution if there are no array elements left,
well this value is returned overall and is stored in this case in this sum constant which we can therefore
log and hence what we see here
if I log this is this same result as before which makes sense, it would be bad if we had a different
result. Now just as before, you can also shorten this, thanks to arrow functions, we only need the first
two arguments so we can get rid of the other two, we need to keep the parentheses here since we have
more than one argument but we can get rid of the curly braces like this, then have to get rid of the
return value and just write it like that, get rid of the semicolon and have a very concise reduce function
which really just reduces this array of numbers to a single number. That's just one use case but reduce
can be really powerful for combining values in an array to a single value.